the emaciated body of 5-year-old
Muhammad al- Nar he was brought to Kamal
adwan Hospital in Northern Gaza
suffering from severe malnutrition
doctors there couldn't save him he's the
latest victim of food shortages caused
by Israel's restrictions on a trucks
into the
strip at another hospital in Northern
Gaza health workers say they're seeing
many infants every day who are
underweight for their age and are
appealing for desperately needed
supplies especially in intensive care
units
we received this case about an hour ago
a malnutrition case we've become used to
receiving cases like this every day this
child is generally suffering from
malnutrition because of lack of
nutrients you can see her age doesn't
match her weight doctors visiting Gaza
from abroad say they've witnessed
catastrophic scenes in hospitals as a
result of Israel's bombardment and
blockade Tanya Hajj Hassan is a
Pediatric Intensive Care doctor from
Jordan our team has been doing this for
5 days we're exhausted I can't imagine
what thein team who's been here for 162
days doing this
247 162 days without resources is
dealing with you asked me whether they
had the resources to to deal with these
cases no the team has been on a twoe
visit to Central Gaza to see firsthand
how the ruined Health Care system is
coping only around 12 of its hospitals
are even partially functioning the rest
have run out of fuel and medicine or
been damaged by fighting an Israeli
raids those left are under intense
pressure this hospital has 800 patients
but only 160 beds seriously ill and
injured people are forced to lie in
corridors the few members of Staff left
are working around the clock while often
coping with their own
grief these Medical Teams are working
hard most of them have lost their
children their wives or their parents
but despite this their on with their
work this shows the psychological
pressure they're facing outbreaks of
disease along with malnutrition are
compounding the problems facing medics
in Gaza increasing numbers of the sick
and injured need medical help but these
doctors have dwindling resources to
treat them Victoria gonb Al jazer Dr
Tanya Haj Hassan who's a pediatrician
with Medical Aid for Palestinians and
she is one of the doctors who was in
gasa very recently Dr Tanya very good to
have you with us again in Aleria on
Aleria joining us from Aman we've spoken
uh many times over the last few months
uh talk to us about your experience your
recent experience in Gaza and the
situation in hospitals there was it as
bad as you imagined it would
be thank you fy um you know I think I
think I've said this to you before in an
interview this is not a humanitarian
crisis uh and there's no humanitarian
solution to what's going on right now
and I think I'm I'm even more convinced
of that now that I've
returned uh we we really witness the
worst of what humanity is capable of um
it's one thing to watch it on
television it's still devastating was
very hard uh
to witness through a screen but to see
it in person to see entire lives
shattered in an instant in person was
was unbearable and you know in the
emergency department when we receive a
mass casualty I I remember one night
having two fathers looking for their
dead spouse and dead children um each of
them had one daughter that was still
alive each of those two daughters were
uh critically uh injured burned and we
were working on resuscitating them one
of those fathers was walking around
covered in soot and Rubble uh holding
his back he was injured himself self and
crying he was barefoot and he kept
saying you know uh why what did we do to
deserve this you know my children were
innocent um yeah one of his daughters
was actually a a seconde medical student
and she was killed as well the the other
father was lying on the ground bleeding
injured himself had a a fractured leg
and uh his eyes were filled with sand
and Rubble so he couldn't open them but
you just saw the tears running down the
side of his face as he he just prayed
over and over again um and I knew for a
fact that uh the daughter we were trying
to resuscitate was not very wasn't doing
well um and he had already known that
his wife and and the rest of his
children had had been killed and that
that was not an uncommon occurrence
unfortunately um Dr T tell had children
who were the only surv yeah because you
went to just just for our viewers to
understand you went to one of the few
uh hospitals that is still functioning
barely functioning in Gaza tell us a bit
more about the location where you were
and what the conditions were like in the
hospital certainly so uh just for
context the majority of the hospitals in
in the Gaza Strip have been either uh
directly targeted and besieged uh or
indirectly put out of service through
the destruction of Roads uh the
bombardment in the very close proximity
direct threats uh Al AA hospital is one
of those hospitals that had been
besieged had been uh targeted the the
staff had fled many of the staff had now
come back it's functioning again it's a
smaller Hospital the two largest
hospitals in Gaza are Al shifa Hospital
in the north and an NAD Hospital who I'm
sure many of you viewers have watched as
both of those hospitals have been
besieged and targeted uh so smaller
hospitals like Al AA Hospital have had
to take the role of these larger
hospitals and are functioning as large
referral facilities which they're not at
all equipped to do Al AA hospital is
working well above capacity it's packed
with patients in the emergency
department in the corridors on the
stairwells um and it's also filled with
internally displaced persons and so it's
um a very busy hos relatively small very
very busy
uh we're caring for some of the sickest
patients in the Gaza Strip uh when
there's a mass casualty nearby ala
hospitals in so we receive a lot of the
mass casualties from that from that area
from kanun um and when a mass casualty
arrives we we don't have the space the
human uh or the physical resources to
care for the patients so they're they're
cared for often on the floor uh with uh
resources that are not sterile because
we don't have sterile
kits and and many of the sterile tools
that we need um and they're cared for in
a very chotic overwhelmed fashion
because there is no mass casualty
protocol in the world that is equipped
or prepared to deal with this type of of
mass casualty
that let me ask you briefly because we
we were just reporting on on the latest
uh child death in Gaza because of
malnutrition
and and you were there recently talk to
us about the children of Gaza right now
and and what they're experiencing we've
had 30 people die of malnutrition in in
recent weeks what what is it like for
children what did you see what did the
children tell you while you were
there yeah um so we spent the full two
weeks in the hospital so I I did not
make it to the north of Gaza I know the
situation is much more dire thereal is
just south of Gaza City so it's uh you
know more in the central area of Gaza
um we had multiple children in the
hospital who had lost their entire
family um some some of them lost their
family while we were physically there
and one child whose face had been the
side of his face and neck had been blown
off he was in the hospital um he he
arrived as um one of the casualties in
in in one of the mass
casualties um and when he arrived his
sister was on the stretcher next to him
96% of her body had been burned both of
their parents and all of their siblings
had been killed and he kept asking for
his family while we were uh trying to
stop the bleeding and care for him
because the the area that had been blown
is where a lot of your vital uh vessels
are and uh uh he could see his sister in
the bed next to him but he didn't know
it was his sister because he couldn't
recognize her she was so badly
disfigured and burnt yeah she ultimately
died 2 days later he he uh whispered to
me the following day when I went to
visit him I have a feeling my whole
family has um Gone to Heaven I wish I
had died too and gone with them I have
nobody left on this Earth that I that uh
I love and
um obviously a very difficult thing yeah
to hear from anybody but certainly a
child and this is not an exception there
there's a child in the hospital who uh
is living in the hospital with a
fractured leg and external
fixators and um his family were killed
uh when they were trying to flee the
north he's being cared for by strangers
and and he lives in the hospital I don't
know what's going to happen to him
unimaginable tragedy you know in a week
it's it's it's uh just listening to you
described there what what you saw and
and you know that the stories of these
children is is absolutely heartbreaking
Dr Tanya thank you as always it's so
good to talk to you and and thank you
for the work you're doing in Gaza Tanya
Haj Hassan a pediatrician with Medical
Aid for Palestinians joining us there
from Aman thank you very
much thank you for having
me